Expand documentation of custom random samplers. (#31787)
JuliaLang/julia: stdlib/Random/docs/src/index.md

The `Random` module defines a customizable framework for obtaining random values that can address these issues. Each invocation of `rand` generates a *sampler* which can be customized with the above trade-offs in mind, by adding methods to `Sampler`, which in turn can dispatch on the random number generator, the object that characterizes the distribution, and a suggestion for the number of repetitions. Currently, for the latter, `Val{1}` (for a single sample) and `Val{Inf}` (for an arbitrary number) are used, with `Random.Repetition` an alias for both.

The object returned by `Sampler` is then used to generate the random values, by a method of `rand` defined for this purpose. Samplers can be arbitrary values, but for most applications the following predefined samplers may be sufficient:

1. `SamplerType{T}()` can be used for implementing samplers that draw from type `T` (e.g. `rand(Int)`),

> 2. `SamplerTrivial(self)` is a simple wrapper for `self`, which can be accessed with `[]`. This is the recommended sampler when no pre-computed information is needed (e.g. `rand(1:3)`)

Reviewer: add a period or something at the end of this sentence

3. `SamplerSimple(self, data)` also contains the additional `data` field, which can be used to store arbitrary pre-computed values.

> In addition, [`Random.gentype`](@ref) should be defined so that element types can be computed for containers.

Author: thanks, corrected

> In addition, [`Random.gentype`](@ref), which falls back to [`eltype`](@ref) is used for computing element types for containers. A method should be defined in case `eltype` is not defined, or a different element type is desired.

Reviewer: I'm confused here: you said 

> making gentype part of the API is the right decision, but I leave this for a future PR

with which I agree, but you document it now, making it public API...

If we keep a reference to `gentype` here in this document, we would need the approval of a core dev... and a rework of this sentence which is still not fully satisfying: the raison-d'être of `gentype` is to handle non-collections: collections have already `eltype` defined by definition, so saying `gentype` is used for computing element types for containers reinforces the idea that `gentype` is redundant. Moreover, the second sentence suggests that its fine to have `eltype != gentype`, which I don't think we should encourage... actually, I may even tend to believe this should not be allowed, i.e. either `eltype` or `gentype` should be defined, but not both... which is a point in favor of removing `gentype` altogether, while extending the scope of `eltype` (so that it's applicable beyond collections).

Random.SamplerType
Random.SamplerTrivial
Random.SamplerSimple
Random.gentype
```

Decoupling pre-computation from actually generating the values is part of the API, and is also available to the user. As an example, assume that `rand(rng, 1:20)` has to be called repeatedly in a loop: the way to take advantage of this decoupling is as follows:

```julia
rng = MersenneTwister()
sp = Random.Sampler(rng, 1:20) # or Random.Sampler(MersenneTwister,1:20)
for x in X
    n = rand(rng, sp) # similar to n = rand(rng, 1:20)
    # use n
end
```

This is the mechanism that is also used in the standard library, e.g. by the default implementation of random array generation (like in `rand(1:20, 10)`).

#### Generating values from a type

Given a type `T`, it's currently assumed that if `rand(T)` is defined, an object of type `T` will be produced. `SamplerType` is the default sampler for types. In order to define random generation of values of type `T`, the `rand(rng::AbstractRNG, ::Random.SamplerType{T})` method should be defined, and should return values what `rand(rng, T)` is expected to return. `Random.gentype` does not need to be defined explicitly for this case, as the fallback method works.

> 

Author: thanks, clarified this

> Given a type `T`, it's currently assumed that if `rand(T)` is defined, an object of type `T` will be produced. `SamplerType` is the *default sampler for types*. In order to define random generation of values of type `T`, the `rand(rng::AbstractRNG, ::Random.SamplerType{T})` method should be defined, and should return values what `rand(rng, T)` is expected to return. `Random.gentype` should *not* need to be defined explicitly for this case, as the type is `T`.

Reviewer: If we keep a reference to `gentype` here, I suggest something like:

"Note that  in this case, `Random.gentype` must *not* be defined (generated values are of type `T`).

 Die(8)
```

#### A simple sampler without pre-computed data

Here we define a sampler for a collection. If no specialized algorithm or pre-computed data is required, it may be simplest to just return a random element, which can be implemented with a `SamplerTrivial` sampler, which is in fact the *default* fallback for values.

> 

Author: I am not sure what I was thinking when writing that. Made the other corrections and using emphasis consistently.

> In order to define random generation out of objects of type `S`, the following method should be defined: `rand(rng::AbstractRNG, sp::Random.SamplerTrivial{S})`. Here, `sp` simply wraps an object of type `S`, which can be accessed via `sp[]`. Continuing the `Die` example, we want now to define `rand(d::Die)` to produce an `Int` corresponding to one of `d`'s sides:

Author: No, this was accidental. Should I revert this in the next PR?

> In order to define random generation out of objects of type `S`, the following method should be defined: `rand(rng::AbstractRNG, sp::Random.SamplerTrivial{S})`. Here, `sp` simply wraps an object of type `S`, which can be accessed via `sp[]`. Continuing the `Die` example, we want now to define `rand(d::Die)` to produce an `Int` corresponding to one of `d`'s sides:

Reviewer: No I think better to leave it like this now, unless you touch again this part. (I have a slight personal preference for split lines, as it's easier to read on my editor and makes it sometimes easier for git diffs and for commenting on github).

 2
```

Given a collection type `S`, it's currently assumed that if `rand(::S)` is defined, an object of type `eltype(S)` will be produced. In the last example, a `Vector{Any}` is produced; the reason is that `eltype(Die) == Any`. The remedy is to define `Base.eltype(::Type{Die}) = Int`.

A `SamplerTrivial` does not have to wrap the original object. For example, in `Random`, `AbstractFloat` types are special-cased, because by default random values are not produced in the whole type domain, but rather in `[0,1)`.

Consequently, a method
```julia
Sampler(::Type{RNG}, ::Type{T}, n::Repetition) where {RNG<:AbstractRNG,T<:AbstractFloat} =
    Sampler(RNG, CloseOpen01(T), n)
```
is defined to return `SamplerTrivial` with a `Random.CloseOpen01{T}}` type defined for this purpose, which has an appropriate `rand` method defined for it.

#### An optimized sampler with pre-computed data

> Consider a discrete distribution, where numbers `1:n` are drawn with given probabilities that some to one. When many values are needed from this distribution, the fastest method if using an [alias table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alias_method). We don't provide the algorithm for building such a table here, but suppose it is available in `make_alias_table(probabilities)` instead, and `draw_number(rng, alias_table)` can be used to draw a random number from it.

Author: Fixing these in the upcoming PR.

The alias table method is only needed for non-equal probabilities from a discrete/categorical distribution. It is used in `Distributions`. `Random` has no such sampler AFAIK.

Suppose that the distribution is described by
```julia
struct DiscreteDistribution{V <: AbstractVector}
    probabilities::V
end
```
and that we *always* want to build an a alias table, regardless of the number of values needed (we learn how to customize this below). The methods
```julia
Random.gentype(::Type{<:DiscreteDistribution}) = Int

function Random.Sampler(::AbstractRng, distribution::DiscreteDistribution, ::Repetition)
    SamplerSimple(disribution, make_alias_table(probabilities))
end
```
should be defined to return a sampler with pre-computed data, then
```julia
function rand(rng::AbstractRNG, sampler::SamplerSimple{<:DiscreteDistribution})
    draw_number(rng, sampler.data)
end
```
will be used to draw the values.

#### Custom sampler types

> In order to implement this decoupling for a custom type, a custom helper type can be used. Going back to our `Die` example: `rand(::Die)` uses random generation from a range, so there is an opportunity for this optimization:

Reviewer: I think you should change "In order to implement this decoupling for a custom type", as you already showed how to do the decoupling for a custom type... maybe add "in cases where `SamplerSimple` is not suitable? (but the problem then is that we explain `SamplerSimple` was suitable in our `Die` example!)

Author: I tried to clarify this, I hope the improved wording is clear.

```
and that we *always* want to build an a alias table, regardless of the number of values needed (we learn how to customize this below). The methods

> ```julia

Reviewer: Here it may be better to replace `gentype` by `eltype`.

Author: Ok, adding back.

rand(rng::AbstractRNG, sp::SamplerDie) = rand(rng, sp.sp)
```

It's now possible to get a sampler with `sp = Sampler(rng, die)`, and use `sp` instead of `die` in any `rand` call involving `rng`. In the simplistic example above, `die` doesn't need to be stored in `SamplerDie` but this is often the case in practice.

> Of course, this pattern is so frequent that a helper type used above, named `Random.SamplerSimple`, is available,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, this pattern is so frequent that the helper type used above, namely `Random.SamplerSimple`, is available,
```

Sampler(RNG::Type{<:AbstractRNG}, die::Die, ::Val{Inf}) = SamplerDieMany(...)
```

> Of course, `rand` must also be defined on those types (i.e. `rand(::AbstractRNG, ::SamplerDie1)` and `rand(::AbstractRNG, ::SamplerDieMany)`). Alternatively, `SamplerTrivial` and `SamplerSimple` can be used if custom types are not necessary.

Reviewer: The "altenatively" seem to provide an alternative to defining `rand`. I would replace it by something like "Note that, as usual, ..."
